---
title: 1.2 Reading a button press
---

## Introduction

This tutorial guides the reader through the process of reading a button press to switch an LED on.
This tutorial builds upon the LED blinking tutorial by introducing input from an external source.
The reader of the tutorial develops an understanding of how to read a digital input from an external
source. They can use this skill to control digital output, such as turning an LED on or off.

## Prerequisites

- Raspberry Pi setup with SplashKit installed.
- Completion of tutorial 1.1 (Blink an LED) or equivalent experience
- Basic programming knowledge in C++
- Familiarity with basic electronics and the ability to wire a basic circuit.
- Equipment: 1 Breadboard, 1 Button, 1 LED, 1 200-300Ω Resistor, 4 DuPont Jumpers (M-F)

## Functions Used

- [Raspi Init](https://splashkit.io/api/raspberry/#raspi-init)
- [Raspi Set Mode](https://splashkit.io/api/raspberry/#raspi-set-mode)
- [Raspi Read](https://splashkit.io/api/raspberry/#raspi-read)
- [Raspi Write](https://splashkit.io/api/raspberry/#raspi-write)
- [Raspi Set Pull Up Down](https://splashkit.io/api/raspberry/#raspi-set-pull-up-down)
- [Raspi Cleanup](https://splashkit.io/api/raspberry/#raspi-cleanup)

## Table of Contents

1. **Building the Circuit**

   - Components Needed
   - Component Explanations
   - Circuit Diagram and Assembly

2. Programming the Button Control

   - Initialising GPIO Pins
   - Reading Button Input
   - Controlling the LED.

3. Debouncing
   - What is debouncing?
   - Implement a basic debounce technique.

## Tutorial Details

This tutorial is designed to provide the step-by-step process of connecting a button and LED to the
GPIO pins. Then it demonstrates programming the Pi to control the LED using the button. The level of
difficulty is for beginners, and is aimed at readers who are new to handling input from external
sources like buttons.

## Expected Learning Outcomes

- Understand how to read digital GPIO inputs
- Learn to control an LED based on button input
- Understanding of the concept of debouncing and why it's important for reliable button input
  reading.
- Be able to implement a basic software debouncing technique.

## Conclusion

This tutorial follows on from 1.1 Blink an LED, teaching the reader about both input and output
through GPIO pins. The tutorial is intended to reinforce concepts of digital signal processing. In
addition, it introduces the concept of debouncing and the challenges involved in creating reliable
electronic interfaces. The skills acquired from this tutorial equips the reader to tackle more
complex projects, paving the way for more advanced and interactive projects.
